---
title: Talasalitaan, or How Did a Tokenizer Performed Suprisingly Well on Corpora Roughly the Size of Tiny Shakespere
layout: page
---


Talasalitaan (lit. vocabulary, but usage is more like a glossary/dictionary) is a vanilla BPE model from SentencePiece trained on the [KapitBisig](https://www.kapitbisig.com/philippines) site, using only Filipino as much as possible and a vocabulary size of 32,768. The entire corpus is just 1.3 MB, but as this page will show later on, it is surprisingly performant. Token counts are also reduced. I also added a [translation in the word "tokenization"](https://github.com/elgikore/talasalitaan/edit/main/index.md#bonus-pagpapapanlapi-as-a-filipino-term-for-tokenization) if I were to name it.

The whole code for Talasalitaan is a simple SentencePiece wrapper, but the highlight of this article is the corpora, not the architecture.

- [Some Backstory](#some-backstory)
- [Data](#data)
  * [Choice of Corpus](#choice-of-corpus)
  * [Data Prep](#data-prep)
- [Some RRL](#some-rrl)
- [Limitations](#limitations)
- [Test Data](#test-data)
- [Results](#results)
  * [Tokens Used](#tokens-used)
  * [Word-to-Token Ratio for Long Sentences](#word-to-token-ratio-for-long-sentences)
  * [Tokens Generated By Talasalitaan](#tokens-generated-by-talasalitaan)
  * [First and last 100 tokens](#first-and-last-100-tokens)
- [Discussion](#discussion)
  * [Tokens Used and Word-to-Token Ratio](#tokens-used-and-word-to-token-ratio)
  * [Inspecting Token Generation and Token Dictionary](#inspecting-token-generation-and-token-dictionary)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [Bonus: *Pagpapapanlapi* as a Filipino Term for Tokenization](#bonus-pagpapapanlapi-as-a-filipino-term-for-tokenization)

<br>

# Some Backstory
I was doing an assingment for COMP423 Deep Learning subject, and one of the assignment is to build a GPT-like arctecture with only PyTorch, tokenized using GPT-2 `tiktoken` and train it on the Tiny Shakespere corpus. As I made that assignment, doing Shakespere texts is pretty analogous to doing your Rizal, Noli Me Tangere, and El Filibusterismo in Filipino textbooks. And that's where I thought, 

> "Why not do this for Rizal texts as well? It fits the bill though."

but I quickly realized, even the state of the art (SOTA) LLMs are still inefficient on other languages, especially Filipino since they are trained on English-heavy domains. Thus the rest is history.

Later on, while doing the assignment, and after painful debugging, I commonly run into `OutOfMemoryError`s in PyTorch (on a 4070 GPU nonetheless) while experimenting with hyperparameters. One of the things that bloat memory is the context size. Sure increasing the size attends to more tokens but Attention has a quadratic memory complexity, which is catastrophic as the number of tokens grows.

Another conundrum is that having a small context size will make monsters of a word like *nakakapagpabagabag* (worrisome) harder to capture in an Attention layer just because of the sheer number of tokens needed (10 in GPT-2) ÔÇö and that's only one word. What if it is part of a long sentence, since there are pretty common long Filipino words like *kinaroroonan* (whereabouts/current location)? What if it is *pinakanakakapagpabagabag* (most worrisome) that will make PyTorch very worried that you allocated 9 GB on a 8 GB GPU? Imagine all of this when parsing Filipino text to an LLM instead of training Tiny Shakespere, for which my GPU struggled with the latter when scaling hyperparameters.

I thought, why not deal with it at the source, and compress tokens? Look at common English words in OpenAI tokenizers, there are treated as one token. If it is decomposable, maybe a few tokens at most. This is my mindset when creating a "Filipino-aware" tokenizer. The good thing is that, unlike English, prefixes/infixes/suffixes are **very** predicable and rarely has exceptions.

# Data
## Choice of Corpus
Everybody says "you just scrape more from Common Crawl" or "curate your data", which is both true. The former understands the reality of AI as data-hungry monsters, and the latter to having representativeness and quality in the model. But what if we model the corpus similar to how a human acquires and masters a language, which is through textbooks, some history, local references, oral traditions, and culture? This is where KapitBisig comes in.

The website has:
- The four main required readings every Filipino goes through:
  - Ibong Adarna
  - Florante at Laura
  - Noli Me Tangere
  - El Filibusterismo
- Works by Dr. Jose Rizal
- Poetical Debate (*Balagtasan*)
- *Awit* (Songs in a classical sense)
- Poems (*Tula*)
- Plays (*Dula*)
- Parables (*Parabula*)
- Legends (*Alamat*)
- Epics (*Epiko*)
- Myths (*Mitolohiya/Mito*)
- Riddles (*Bugtong*)
- Filipino Nursery Rhymes (*Tugmang Tagalog*)
- *Sabayang Pagbigkas* (Choral Recitation is a close equivalent in English)
- Fables (Pabula)
- Filipino Proverbs (*Salawikaing Filipino*)
- Filipino Idioms (*Kawikaang Tagalog*)
- Basic Level Learn Filipino page
- The full 1987 Constitution in Filipino
- Short summary of each Philippine Presidents
- Short summary of Filipino Heroes (*Mga Bayani*)

All of these are basically what you would expect in a Filipino subject.

Why did I model the corpus that way? This is because of a phenomenon in Deep Learning that even if AI cannot "understand" or "learn" in a strict sense like humans do, they do arrive at similar conclusions on average. If this logic is true, then it will hold up here. 

## Data Prep
The data is manually copy-pasted and cleaned.

All of the text uses Filipino versions whenever possible. Most of the English is stripped away or (rarely) translated, such as \[Chorus\] Ôćĺ \[Koro\] or \[Repeat from 1\] Ôćĺ \[Uulitin ang 1\]. The only exceptions for this are proper nouns, place names, or there is no natural alternative. This choice was made to ensure that the model learns Filipino-style word constructions first as English-style word constructions are very different.

For the handling of Spanish diacritics, all of them are removed with the exception of ├▒ as it is part of the Filipino alphabet. Most diacritics you see in Filipino are to guide pronounciation and is used as standard practice on some Filipino textbooks, but it can be safely ignored. The only time diacritics are preserved are on Spanish proper nouns like in the four required readings.

For the required readings, all of them are book summaries because the original books use the old Filipino orthography system. Some examples are n═ág for "ng" and frequent use of Spanish-influnenced orthography like *cuarto* for *kwarto* (room). Even if the Spanish-influnenced orthography of old Filipino spellings are pronounced exactly the same as their modern spelling, it is laborious to replace it with modern spellng styles and risking corrupting the text. The only exception to this rule is Florante at Laura, which conveniently has the original book in modern Filipino orthography. I used both the original book and the book summary for this as a result.

Weird spacing like "  " is corrected (" "), tab spaces are stripped, unicode elipsis ("ÔÇŽ") is expanded to "...", and the "/"'s in *Sabayang Pagbigkas* are removed because it is frequently occuring, which might bias the BPE. All upper and lowercase are preserved.

# Some RRL
Initially, I was going to compare mine with GPT-2 and GPT-4o tokenizers to test performance, as I don't believe that there is a specialized Filipino tokenizer. But for completeness sake, I researched "Filipino Tokenizers" on GitHub, and it actually has results, but only one fits the idea which is JpCurada's [`filipino-tokenizer`](https://github.com/JpCurada/filipino-tokenizer). It describes itself as the "first open-source, morphologically-aware subword tokenize for Philippine languages". It is a BPE with handwritten rules for prefixes/infixes/suffixes made in Python and part Rust. The presence of this repo alone makes it possible to compare apples to apples with aside from apples to green apples (not oranges as OpenAI GPT models use BPE).

# Limitations
It doesn't perform well in English words, which is expected for a tokenizer that is trained on mainly Filipino words ~99.9% of the time. It also doesn't aim to be "morphologically accurate" like in JpCurada's case as I let the data speak to itself during training ÔÇö which merges are valuable is for BPE to decide statistically. This is because I am confident that even BPE can pick up very common prefix/infix/suffix styles in Filipino since they are ubiquitous in everyday speech and writing, whether it is simple or stacked affixing.

This proof of concept is more on reducing token cost rather than achieving full linguistic coverage across all Philippine languages. 

# Test Data
All sentences are not seen during training except indicated otherwise as a quick smoke check.

Sample sentences are as follows:

<details>
<summary>1. Greeting</summary>

<br>
  
> Kamusta, mga kababayan!

<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>2. Long affixes (This word is seen during training, but it acts as a sanity check on whether this model mastered it at all)</summary>

<br>
  
> pagpapanibagong-tatag

<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>3. The famous tongue-twister</summary>

<br>
  
> nakakapagpabagabag

<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>4. Number 3's sidekick</summary>

<br>
  
> pinakanakakapagpabagabag


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>5. Good morning</summary>

<br>
  
> Magandang umaga, kapatid!


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>6. Simple sentence</summary>

<br>
  
> Kumain siya ng pagkain.


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>7. Simple question</summary>

<br>
  
> kumain ka na ba?


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>8. Full sentence from <a href="https://www.kapitbisig.com/philippines/information/arts-and-literature-mga-kuwentong-bayan-folktales_190.html">KapitBisig</a> (This word is seen during training, but it acts as a sanity check on whether this model mastered it at all)</summary>

<br>
  
> Ito ay pagsasalaysay ng mga katutubo sa kanilang paniniwalang lakas ng pisikal na kapaligiran at lakas ng pananampalataya ng lumilimbag sa kanilang buhay at kapalaran.


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>9. Historical Wikipedia <a href="https://tl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kasaysayan_ng_Pilipinas_(1565%E2%80%931898)#Pagdating_ni_Ruy_L%C3%B3pez_de_Villalobos">article</a> sentence</summary>

<br>
  
> Ang unang paglalayag na pambuong mundo sa ngalan ng Espanya ay nasundan ng apat pang mga ekspedisyon mula 1525 hanggang 1542. Sa ikaapat na panggagalugad, narating ni Ruy Lopez de Villalobos ang Kapuluan ng Pilipinas at pinangalanan niya ang mga pulo mula kay Philip II na noon ay may katayuan bilang tagapagmana ng trono ng Kaharian ng Espanya, bagaman hindi pa pormal na naitatag ang Pilipinas bilang opisyal na teritoryo ng Espanya.


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>10. Declaration of Human Rights Preamble in Filipino</summary>

<br>
  
> Sapagkat ang pagkilala sa katutubong karangalan at sa pantay at di-maikakait na mga karapatan ng lahat ng nabibilang sa angkan ng tao ay siyang saligan ng kalayaan, katarungan at kapayapaan sa daigdig.


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>11. <a href="https://tl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unang_Pahina#Patungkol">Patungkol</a> ng Wikipedia</summary>

<br>
  
> Ang Wikipedia ay isang proyektong online na ensiklopedya na panlahat, nakasulat sa maraming wika, at pinagtutulungan ang paggawa ng mga artikulo sa prinsipyong wiki. Naglalayon ang proyektong ito na mag-alok ng mga nilalaman na malayang muling magagamit, walang pinapanigan, at napapatunayan, na maaring baguhin at mapabuti ninuman. Nakikilala ang Wikipedia sa pamamagitan ng mga naitatag na prinsipyo. Nakalisensiya ang nilalaman nito sa ilalim ng Creative Commons BY-SA. Maari itong kopyahin at muling gamitin sa ilalim ng parehong lisensiya, na sumasailalim sa paggalang sa mga kondisyon. Ibinbigay ng Wikipedia ang mga nilalaman nito ng walang bayad, walang patalastas, at hindi nagsasamantala sa paggamit ng personal na datos ng mga gumagamit nito.


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>12. One sentence of <a href="https://www.tagaloglang.com/talumpati-ni-nelson-mandela/">Nelson Mandela's speech</a> in Filipino</summary>

<br>
  
> Ang ating mga nagawa bilang ordinaryong mamamayan ng Timog Africa ay kailangang magbunga ng tunay na mamamayan nito na magpapalawak sa paniniwala ng sangkatauhan sa katarungan, magpapalakas sa tiwala sa kadakilaan ng kaluluwa, at magtutustos sa lahat ng ating pag-asa sa kapakinabangan ng buhay ng lahat.


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>
13. <a href="https://www.gmanetwork.com/news/balitambayan/umg/987386/drawer-ng-cabinet-minulto-nga-ba-matapos-na-mahuli-cam-na-nagbukas-sara/story/">KMJS Article</a></summary>

<br>
  
> Nabalot ng kababalaghan ang masaya sanang bonding ng magkakaibigan nang bigla na lang magbukas-sara na mag-isa sa kanilang harapan ang drawer ng isang cabinet. Ang kinaroroonan ng cabinet, isang bahay-bakasyunan na pinaparentahan at kamamatay lang umano ng may-ari.


<br>
</details>
<details>
<summary>
14. <a href="https://bandera.inquirer.net/444456/bini-jhoanna-kinabog-weather-report-sa-good-day-la-achieve-sa-bucket-list">BINI Article</a></summary>

<br>
  
> NATUPAD ang isa sa bucket list ng BINI leader na si Jhoanna Robles, habang nasa Amerika. Biglaan kasi siyang naging weather presenter nang mag-guest ang nation's girl group sa morning show na Good Day LA, kung saan una nilang ibinahagi ang kanilang makasaysayang performance sa Coachella, pati na rin ang kanilang bagong EP na Signals at nalalapit na world tour. Pero imbes na matapos lang sa chikahan, biglang nagkaroon ng nakakatuwang twist!


<br>
</details>

# Results
## Tokens Used

|  Sentence Ôäľ | GPT-2 | GPT-4o | filipino-tokenizer | Talasalitaan 
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 1 | 12 | 8 | 9 | ***6*** |
| 2 | 11 | 8 | 7 | ***4*** |
| 3 | 10 | 6 | 7 | ***3*** |
| 4 | 12 | 8 | 9 | ***5*** |
| 5 | 11 | 8 | 11 | ***5*** |
| 6 | 10 | 7 | 14 | ***6*** |
| 7 | 7 | 6 | 12 | ***5*** |
| 8 | 69 | 46 | 81 | ***27*** |
| 9 | 150 | 120 | 192 | ***94*** |
| 10 | 78 | 59 | 99 | ***39*** |
| 11 | 269 | 192 | 324 | ***174*** |
| 12 | 115 | 85 | 144 | ***58*** |
| 13 | 90 | 72 | 114 | ***63*** |
| 14 | 143 | ***106*** | 199 | 139 |

> **NOTE:**
> ***Bold and italic*** is the lowest recorded token count

## Word-to-Token Ratio for Long Sentences

|  Sentence Ôäľ | Ôäľ of Words (Theoretical Floor) | GPT-2 | GPT-4o | filipino-tokenizer | Talasalitaan 
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 8  | 25  | 2.76  | 1.84  | 3.24  | ***1.08***  |
| 9  | 72  | 2.08  | 1.67  | 2.67  | ***1.31***  |
| 10  | 32  | 2.44  | 1.84  | 3.09  | ***1.22***  |
| 11  | 110  | 2.45  | 1.75  | 2.95  | ***1.58***  |
| 12  | 46  | 2.50  | 1.85  | 3.13  | ***1.26***  |
| 13  | 38  | 2.37  | 1.89  | 3.00  | ***1.66***  |
| 14  | 72  | 1.99  | ***1.47***  | 2.76  | 1.93  |

> **NOTE:**
> Lower means better compressed.
> Theoretical ratio is 1.0, meaning one word = one token.

## Tokens Generated By Talasalitaan
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ1</summary>

    ['ÔľüKam', 'usta', ',', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľükababayan', '!']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ2</summary>

    ['Ôľüpagpap', 'anibagong', '-', 'tatag']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ3</summary>

    ['Ôľünakak', 'apagp', 'abagabag']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ4</summary>

    ['Ôľüpinakan', 'ak', 'ak', 'apagp', 'abagabag']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ5</summary>

    ['ÔľüMagandang', 'Ôľüumaga', ',', 'Ôľükapatid', '!']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ6</summary>

    ['ÔľüKum', 'ain', 'Ôľüsiya', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüpagkain', '.']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ7</summary>

    ['Ôľükumain', 'Ôľüka', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüba', '?']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ8</summary>

    ['ÔľüIto', 'Ôľüay', 'Ôľüpagsasalaysay', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľükatutubo', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľükanilang', 'Ôľüpaniniwalang',
    'Ôľülakas', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüpisikal', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľükapaligiran', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľülakas', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüpananampalataya', 'Ôľüng',
    'Ôľülum', 'ilimbag', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľükanilang', 'Ôľübuhay', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľükapalaran', '.']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ9</summary>

    ['ÔľüAng', 'Ôľüunang', 'Ôľüpaglalayag', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüpamb', 'uong', 'Ôľümundo', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüngalan', 'Ôľüng',
    'ÔľüEspanya', 'Ôľüay', 'Ôľünasundan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüapat', 'Ôľüpang', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľüeks', 'p', 'ed', 'isyon', 'Ôľümula',
    'Ôľü15', '2', '5', 'Ôľühanggang', 'Ôľü15', '4', '2.', 'ÔľüSa', 'Ôľüikaapat', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüpangg', 'agal', 'ugad',
    ',', 'Ôľünarating', 'Ôľüni', 'ÔľüR', 'uy', 'ÔľüLopez', 'Ôľüde', 'ÔľüVill', 'al', 'ob', 'os', 'Ôľüang', 'ÔľüKapuluan',
    'Ôľüng', 'ÔľüPilipinas', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľüpinangalan', 'an', 'Ôľüniya', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľüpulo', 'Ôľümula', 'Ôľükay',
    'ÔľüPh', 'ilip', 'ÔľüII', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľünoon', 'Ôľüay', 'Ôľümay', 'Ôľükatayuan', 'Ôľübilang', 'Ôľütagapagmana', 'Ôľüng',
    'Ôľütrono', 'Ôľüng', 'ÔľüKah', 'arian', 'Ôľüng', 'ÔľüEspanya', ',', 'Ôľübagaman', 'Ôľühindi', 'Ôľüpa', 'Ôľüp', 'ormal',
    'Ôľüna', 'Ôľünait', 'atag', 'Ôľüang', 'ÔľüPilipinas', 'Ôľübilang', 'Ôľüopisyal', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüteritoryo', 'Ôľüng',
    'ÔľüEspanya', '.']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ10</summary>

    ['ÔľüSapagkat', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľüpagkilala', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľükatutubong', 'Ôľükarangalan', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüpantay',
    'Ôľüat', 'Ôľüdi', '-', 'ma', 'ik', 'aka', 'it', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľükarapatan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľülahat', 'Ôľüng',
    'Ôľünabibilang', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüangkan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľütao', 'Ôľüay', 'Ôľüsiyang', 'Ôľüsaligan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľükalayaan',
    ',', 'Ôľükatarungan', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľükapayapaan', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüdaigdig', '.']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ11</summary>

    ['ÔľüAng', 'ÔľüW', 'ik', 'ipe', 'dia', 'Ôľüay', 'Ôľüisang', 'Ôľüproy', 'ekt', 'ong', 'Ôľüon', 'l', 'ine', 
    'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüen', 'sik', 'l', 'op', 'edya', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüpanlahat', ',', 'Ôľünakasulat', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľümaraming'
    , 'Ôľüwika', ',', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľüpinagt', 'utulungan', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľüpaggawa', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľüar', 'tik',
    'ulo', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüprins', 'ipyong', 'Ôľüw', 'iki', '.', 'ÔľüNagl', 'alayon', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľüproy', 'ekt',
    'ong', 'Ôľüito', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümag', '-', 'alok', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľünilalaman', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümalayang',
    'Ôľümuling', 'Ôľümagagamit', ',', 'Ôľüwalang', 'Ôľüpinapan', 'igan', ',', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľünapapat', 'unayan',
    ',', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümaaring', 'Ôľübaguhin', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľümap', 'abuti', 'Ôľüninuman', '.', 'ÔľüNakikilala', 'Ôľüang',
    'ÔľüW', 'ik', 'ipe', 'dia', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüpamamagitan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľünait', 'atag', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüprins',
    'ip', 'yo', '.', 'ÔľüNak', 'alis', 'ensiya', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľünilalaman', 'Ôľünito', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüilalim', 'Ôľüng',
    'ÔľüC', 're', 'ative', 'ÔľüComm', 'ons', 'ÔľüB', 'Y', '-', 'SA', '.', 'ÔľüMaari', 'Ôľüitong', 'Ôľüko', 'p',
    'y', 'ahin', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľümuling', 'Ôľügamitin', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüilalim', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüparehong', 'Ôľül', 'is', 
    'ensiya', ',', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüsumasa', 'ilalim', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüpaggalang', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľükondisyon', '.',
    'ÔľüIbin', 'bigay', 'Ôľüng', 'ÔľüW', 'ik', 'ipe', 'dia', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľünilalaman', 'Ôľünito', 'Ôľüng',
    'Ôľüwalang', 'Ôľübayad', ',', 'Ôľüwalang', 'Ôľüpat', 'alastas', ',', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľühindi', 'Ôľünagsas',
    'amantala', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüpaggamit', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüpersonal', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüdatos', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľügumagamit',
    'Ôľünito', '.']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ12</summary>

    ['ÔľüAng', 'Ôľüating', 'Ôľümga', 'Ôľünagawa', 'Ôľübilang', 'Ôľüordin', 'aryong', 'Ôľümamamayan', 'Ôľüng', 'ÔľüTimog',
    'ÔľüA', 'f', 'r', 'ica', 'Ôľüay', 'Ôľükailangang', 'Ôľümagbunga', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľütunay', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümamamayan',
    'Ôľünito', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümagpap', 'alawak', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüpaniniwala', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüsangkatauhan', 'Ôľüsa',
    'Ôľükatarungan', ',', 'Ôľümagpap', 'alakas', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľütiwala', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľükadakilaan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľükaluluwa',
    ',', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľümagtut', 'ustos', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľülahat', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüating', 'Ôľüpag', '-', 'asa', 'Ôľüsa',
    'Ôľükapakinabangan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľübuhay', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľülahat', '.']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ13</summary>

    ['ÔľüNab', 'alot', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľükababalaghan', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľümasaya', 'Ôľüsanang', 'Ôľüb', 'on', 'ding', 'Ôľüng',
    'Ôľümagkakaibigan', 'Ôľünang', 'Ôľübigla', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľülang', 'Ôľümagbukas', '-', 's', 'ara', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümag',
    '-', 'isa', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľükanilang', 'Ôľüharapan', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľüdr', 'aw', 'er', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüisang', 'Ôľüc',
    'abin', 'et', '.', 'ÔľüAng', 'Ôľükinaroroonan', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľüc', 'abin', 'et', ',', 'Ôľüisang', 'Ôľübahay',
    '-', 'bakasyunan', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüpinap', 'ar', 'ent', 'ahan', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľükam', 'amatay', 'Ôľülang',
    'Ôľüumano', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľümay', '-', 'ari', '.']

</details>
<details>
<summary>Sentence Ôäľ14</summary>

    ['ÔľüN', 'AT', 'UP', 'AD', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľüisa', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľübu', 'c', 'ket', 'Ôľül', 'ist', 'Ôľüng', 'ÔľüB', 'INI',
    'Ôľüle', 'ad', 'er', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüsi', 'ÔľüJ', 'ho', 'an', 'na', 'ÔľüR', 'ob', 'les', ',', 'Ôľühabang', 'Ôľünasa',
    'ÔľüAmerika', '.', 'ÔľüB', 'igl', 'aan', 'Ôľükasi', 'Ôľüsiyang', 'Ôľünaging', 'Ôľüw', 'eat', 'h', 'er', 'Ôľüpres',
    'enter', 'Ôľünang', 'Ôľümag', '-', 'g', 'uest', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľünat', 'ion', "'", 's', 'Ôľüg', 'ir', 'l', 'Ôľüg',
    'ro', 'up', 'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüm', 'orn', 'ing', 'Ôľüs', 'h', 'ow', 'Ôľüna', 'ÔľüG', 'ood', 'ÔľüDay', 'ÔľüL', 'A', ',',
    'Ôľükung', 'Ôľüsaan', 'Ôľüuna', 'Ôľünilang', 'Ôľüibin', 'ahagi', 'Ôľüang', 'Ôľükanilang', 'Ôľümakasaysayang', 'Ôľüper',
    'f', 'or', 'man', 'ce', 'Ôľüsa', 'ÔľüCo', 'ach', 'el', 'la', ',', 'Ôľüpati', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľürin', 'Ôľüang',
    'Ôľükanilang', 'Ôľübagong', 'ÔľüE', 'P', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľü"', 'Sig', 'nal', 's', '"', 'Ôľüat', 'Ôľünal', 'alapit',
    'Ôľüna', 'Ôľüw', 'or', 'l', 'd', 'Ôľüto', 'ur', '.', 'ÔľüPero', 'Ôľüimb', 'es', 'Ôľüna', 'Ôľümatapos', 'Ôľülang',
    'Ôľüsa', 'Ôľüc', 'hik', 'ahan', ',', 'Ôľübiglang', 'Ôľünagkaroon', 'Ôľüng', 'Ôľünakakat', 'uwang', 'Ôľüt', 'w',
    'ist', '!']

</details>
<br>

## First and last 100 tokens

<details>
<summary>Token vocabulary</summary>

|  First 100 | Last 100 |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| ng	0	| Ôľünapasabihan	-32594
| ang	-1 |	Ôľünapipinsala	-32595
| an	-2 |	Ôľünapipintong	-32596
| Ôľün	-3 |	Ôľünapuluputan	-32597
| Ôľüs	-4 |	Ôľünapupuhunan	-32598
| at	-5 |	Ôľünararanasan	-32599
| ag	-6 |	Pepe	-32600
| Ôľüm	-7 |	Sari	-32601
| al	-8 |	Totoo	-32602
| in	-9 |	ipala	-32603
| ay	-10 |	lagda	-32604
| Ôľük	-11 |	nahan	-32605
| Ôľüp	-12 |	ÔľüLaws	-32606
| Ôľüng	-13 |	Ôľütuba	-32607
| Ôľüsa	-14 |	Ôľüutal	-32608
| Ôľüna	-15 |		abasan	-32609
| Ôľüang	-16 |		ihimay	-32610
| ak	-17 |		ilipos	-32611
| it	-18 |		lahing	-32612
| as	-19	 |	sakong	-32613
| il	-20	 |	uester	-32614
| am	-21 |		unsini	-32615
| ar	-22 |		ÔľüUnawa	-32616
| ap	-23 |		Ôľüiigsi	-32617
| ing	-24 |		Ôľülilik	-32618
| Ôľüb	-25 |		Ôľütabug	-32619
| ong	-26 |		Ôľütubis	-32620
| ah	-27 |		ÔľüNiluto	-32621
| aw	-28 |		ÔľüSybyla	-32622
| iy	-29 |		Ôľübagsak	-32623
| ab	-30 |		Ôľüinihim	-32624
| Ôľüat	-31 |		Ôľülangka	-32625
| Ôľüd	-32 |		Ôľülegwas	-32626
| Ôľüt	-33 |		Ôľüsaksak	-32627
| Ôľül	-34 |		Ôľüsugong	-32628
| ga	-35 |		ÔľüKaipala	-32629
| ul	-36 |		ÔľüMatulin	-32630
| is	-37 |		ÔľüNakakap	-32631
| Ôľümga	-38 |		ÔľüPanitik	-32632
| on	-39 |		Ôľühihimay	-32633
| Ôľüay	-40 |		Ôľüikahiya	-32634
| ÔľüA	-41 |		Ôľüinuunan	-32635
| un	-42 |		Ôľümadilig	-32636
| um	-43 |		Ôľümasilip	-32637
| Ôľüh	-44 |		Ôľünahilig	-32638
| ig	-45 |		Ôľünaitala	-32639
| ÔľüS	-46 |		Ôľüpalatok	-32640
| Ôľüpag	-47 |		Ôľütinapon	-32641
| ÔľüP	-48 |		Ôľütubigan	-32642
| ad	-49 |		Ôľüumampon	-32643
| ik	-50 |		amamalagi	-32644
| ÔľüN	-51 |		ÔľüAlunsini	-32645
| ÔľüK	-52 |		ÔľüDimatiga	-32646
| ÔľüM	-53 |		ÔľüPagsipot	-32647
| ib	-54 |		Ôľübahalang	-32648
| iya	-55 |		Ôľüdadalhan	-32649
| ung	-56 |		Ôľükainipan	-32650
| ip	-57 |		Ôľümagbalag	-32651
| Ôľükan	-58 |		Ôľümaputing	-32652
| ÔľüI	-59 |		Ôľümaunahan	-32653
| Ôľümag	-60 |		Ôľünakasiya	-32654
| Ôľünag	-61 |		Ôľüpaglilip	-32655
| Ôľüsi	-62 |		Ôľüpasyente	-32656
| Ôľüni	-63 |		ÔľüHinagupit	-32657
| Ôľüg	-64 |		Ôľükaikalawa	-32658
| us	-65 |		Ôľülilikumin	-32659
| ito	-66 |		Ôľünakatawag	-32660
| ÔľüD	-67 |		Ôľünakatungo	-32661
| im	-68 |		Ôľünakilaban	-32662
| ut	-69 |		Ôľünalilipos	-32663
| ÔľüAng	-70 |		Ôľüpagtaghoy	-32664
| Ôľüis	-71 |		ÔľüNaglabasan	-32665
| ala	-72 |		ÔľüNakakapaso	-32666
| di	-73 |		ÔľüNapakabuti	-32667
| ÔľüB	-74 |		Ôľükabulukang	-32668
| uh	-75 |		Ôľümaitimbang	-32669
| ilang	-76 |		Ôľünagparungg	-32670
| uk	-77 |		Ôľünagtatahan	-32671
| ÔľüT	-78 |		Ôľünakatataas	-32672
| os	-79 |		Ôľünapaloloko	-32673
| er	-80 |		Ôľüpamilihang	-32674
| Ôľükany	-81 |		Ôľüsaliksikin	-32675
| apat	-82 |		Ôľüsumusulong	-32676
| and	-83 |		Ôľü(1971-1972)	-32677
| ÔľüH	-84 |		Ôľüinihimatong	-32678
| up	-85 |		Ôľünaririmarim	-32679
| ari	-86 |		Ôľünarurumihan	-32680
| or	-87 |		Ôľünasaksihang	-32681
| indi	-88 |		Ôľünasasabugan	-32682
| ila	-89 |		Ôľünasasangkap	-32683
| ÔľüL	-90 |		Ôľünasusubukan	-32684
| Ôľüisang	-91 |		Ôľünasusuungan	-32685
| ub	-92 |		Ôľünataguriang	-32686
| Ôľü"	-93 |		Ôľünatambangan	-32687
| Ôľükanyang	-94 |		Ôľünatatagalan	-32688
| Ôľünang	-95 |		Ôľünatitigatig	-32689
| uw	-96 |		Ôľünatititigan	-32690
| en	-97 |		Ôľünatuklasang	-32691
| ur	-98 |		Ôľünatutularan	-32692
| ot	-99	 |	Ôľünatutulayan	-32693
| Ôľüsiya	-100 |		Ôľünatututuhan	-32694

</details>
<br>

> **NOTE:**
> It is interesting that at the tail end of the `.vocab` file, it still produced meaningful tokens for most of them.

# Discussion
## Tokens Used and Word-to-Token Ratio
For the sample sentences, Talasalitaan consistently showed huge reductions on token savings despite being trained on just one site, with the only sentence that it struggled with is the BINI article sentence, which is full of Taglish construction and pure English words, something GPT-4o had the upper edge in token count due to how it is trained on English corpora. 

The most interesting part is that filipino-tokenizer behaved pretty differently on alternative spelling of *pinakanakakapagpabagabag*, which is *pinakanakapagpapabagabag*. I thought I made a typo on it because it is so long, so I corrected it (all results above use *pinakanakakapagpabagabag*), but it is actually a variation when I double-checked on a Filipino dictionary. Look:

*pinakanakapagpapabagabag* (variational spelling):

    ['pinaka', 'nakapagpapa', 'bagabag']                 # filipino-tokenizer
    ['Ôľüpinakan', 'ak', 'apag', 'pap', 'abagabag']        # Talasalitaan

*pinakanakakapagpabagabag* (common spelling):

    ['pinaka', 'Ôľü', 'nakaka', 'Ôľü', 'pag', 'Ôľü', 'pa', 'Ôľü', 'bagabag']    # filipino-tokenizer
    ['Ôľüpinakan', 'ak', 'ak', 'apagp', 'abagabag']                       # Talasalitaan

Even on a supposed "typo", which in reality is an alternative form, Talasalitaan is robust to it. Still 5 tokens. It had generalized Filipino text very well. Moreover, GPT-2 was not affected by the change either, but GPT-4o only added one more token (7 Ôćĺ 8), yet it is still nowhere near `filipino-tokenizer`'s jump from 3 to 9.

The reason why `filipino-tokenizer` behaves this way is because it enforces the same rules for affix construction in Filipino, which is how humans parse words as syllables, making it very interpretable. But in the eyes of Attention, it is just more tokens to process, which hurt performance if the context window is limited due to VRAM constraints, making `OutOfMemoryError`s more frequent when scaling a potential AI model. Futhermore, limited "effective" context window due to bloated tokens decrease long-range dependencies, making models "forget" more often.

Attention doesn't learn the same way as humans do; they only process tokens at the end of the day, inferring meaning from surronding tokens from pure statistics ÔÇö basically context clues for AI. It just says, "Ah, A usually goes with B, so the next time I see it, it is more probably A and B, and score it higher". BPE also does the same but instead of scoring, it is merging common affix-like constructions like Huffman encoding.

Another reason why `filipino-tokenizer` bloats more tokens is that both morpheme boundaries and literal whitespace are counted as separate tokens. It is like counting the dashes when you syllabicate pinaka-nakaka-pag-pa-bagabag and not splitting spaces.

In conclusion, Talasalitaan has a strong generalization on Filipino, but knows what its boundaries are, as seen in the BINI article and any English words ÔÇö it fragments them like how English-centric tokenizers fragment non-English words.

## Inspecting Token Generation and Token Dictionary
Checking the tokens that are not whole words... I'm speechless:

|  Talasalitaan | Correct Alignment/Syllable Split |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| `['ÔľüKam', 'usta']` | Ka-musta
| `['Ôľüpagpap', 'anibagong']` | pagpapa-nibagong
| `['Ôľünakak', 'apagp', 'abagabag']` | nakaka-pagpa-bagabag
| `['Ôľüpinakan', 'ak', 'ak', 'apagp', 'abagabag']` | pinaka-na-ka-ka-pagpa-bagabag
| `['ÔľüLopez', 'Ôľüde', 'ÔľüVill', 'al', 'ob', 'os']` | Lopez de Villa-lo-bos
| `['Ôľüeks', 'p', 'ed', 'isyon']` | eks-pe-disyon
| `['Ôľüpamb', 'uong']` | pam-buong
| `['ma', 'ik', 'aka', 'it']` | ma-i-kaka-it
| `['Ôľüproy', 'ekt', 'ong']` | pro-yek-tong
| `['Ôľüar', 'tik', 'ulo']` | ar-ti-kulo
| `['Ôľümag', '-', 'g', 'uest']` | mag-guest
| `['Ôľüc', 'hik', 'ahan']` | chi-ka-han
| `['ÔľüB', 'igl', 'aan']` | Big-laan
| `['Ôľülum', 'ilimbag',]` | lumi-limbag
| `['Ôľüpangg', 'agal', 'ugad']` | pang-gaga-lugad
| `['Ôľüpat', 'alastas']` | pa-talastas
| `[ÔľüNak', 'alis', 'ensiya',]` | Naka-li-sensya
| `['Ôľüpinapan', 'igan']` | pinapa-nigan
| `['Ôľünagsas','amantala']` | nagsasa-mantala
| `['Ôľüordin', 'aryong']` | ordi-naryong
| `['ÔľüN', 'AT', 'UP', 'AD']` | NA-TU-PAD
| `['ÔľüB', 'INI']` | BI-NI
| `['ÔľüJ', 'ho', 'an', 'na', 'ÔľüR', 'ob', 'les']` | Jho-an-na Ro-bles

This is very close to real syllable splits, even if not perfect. And the crazy part? It learned by pure frequency statistics ÔÇö very similar to "LLMs looking like they understand things", but on a tokenizer scale. This is a very strong case of Talasalitaan generalizing to words not found in its corpus, and it is important to keep in mind that it is case-sensitive, which makes it more impressive. It's as if it "knows" Filipino word constructions. 

The surprising part, it knows how to syllabicate/split BINI (pronounced BEE-NEE or BEANIE), a very recent P-Pop group that had gone to Coachella, even if the training corpus is just a compressed Filipino textbook. Moreover, even the name `['ÔľüJ', 'ho', 'an', 'na', 'ÔľüR', 'ob', 'les']` is very close, despite the tokenizer not knowing that Robles is a super common Filipino surname and Jhoanna is a alterante version of Johanna, which the latter is also a common Filipino first name. If my corpus had the name "Robles", it would most likely be one word due to the sheer amount of people having that name, both in literature and in real life.

Inspecting the dictionary reveals that the first 100 tokens are very common Filipino prefix/infix/suffixes and linkage verbs. This is expected. What is not however is that even on the tail end of the dictionary, most of them are legitimate Filipino text or valid affix stacking. For comparison, GPT-2's tail end is just gibberish, not valid English words nor affixes.

# Conclusion
In short, a representative corpus + tidy data practices + aligned algorithm is the best way to tokenize and save on tokens. Moreover, it makes the model more interpretable since there are only few to no implicit assumptions on behavior, and easily scalable since there are less moving parts. 

A simple model generalizes well than a complex model with many tricks, which is a lesson that shows in Deep Learning time and again in breakthroughs such as Attention replacing complex LSTMs and RNNs, ResNets to keep quality, Dropout just randomly zeroing out weights to improve perfomance, TrivialAugment using a random augment and strength beat many complex augmentations, and many more.

Lastly, data representability matters even more on languages like Filipino, where it lags far behind in ML/AI. This gap cannot be remedied with just using a English-based tokenizer, but rather a native solution aligned with Filipino morphology.  English does not even have infixes, so it makes little sense to use a tokenizer that has English morphological assumptions when modelling a language that uses infixes productively. By tuning the tokenizer to the language it was made to represent, an underepresented language can be as comparable as English in terms of performance, since it is tuned to their linguistic structure, which affects LLM inference down the line.

# Bonus: *Pagpapapanlapi* as a Filipino Term for Tokenization
If I were to translate "tokenization" in Filipino, it would be *pagpapapanlapi*. 

Etymology:
* *Pagpa-* = To cause/do
* *-pa-* = Doing (something) repeatedly (duplicate *pa*)
* *panlapi* = Affix (since BPE or Unigram does affix-like merges)

The literal translation would be: "doing/creating affix-like structures repeatedly".

The equivalent, "tokenizer", is *tagapagpapapanlapi*. Mouthful but very accurate.

Etymology:
* *Taga-* = Someone that does
* *-pagpa-* = To cause/do
* *-pa-* = Doing (something) repeatedly (duplicate *pa*)
* *panlapi* = Affix (since BPE or Unigram does affix-like merges)

The literal translation would be: "someone or a system doing/creating affix-like structures repeatedly" compressed in one long word.

Aside from that, the words tokenization and tokenizer can be rendered in Filipino orthography as *tokenisasyon* and *tokenisador* as synonyms respectively.
